schema: starci/knowledge-source@1
id: ui.proof.anatomy-source
title: Anatomy source
appliesTo:
  - ui
family: proof
purpose: |-
  This file answers one question for direction images and for the screens that follow them:
  where did the shape of each region come from?

  A direction names components (`SurfaceListCard`, `WorkspaceShell`, `Input`) and a generated
  image claims to draw them. A component's name is not its shape: the shipped anatomy of
  `SurfaceListCard` is a raised surface bounding every row, label and fact above, footer below —
  discoverable only by rendering the installed grammar, not by reading the export list. An image
  model given only the name invents a plausible list; that invention is not direction.

  The formula a direction is generated by is therefore fixed:

  ```text
  direction = real-render(anatomy) + brand(surface) + composition(intent)
  ```

  anatomy      the pixels of the real installed component, captured from its storybook or an
               equivalent render harness — the only lawful source for what a region looks like
  brand        `brand/index.yaml`: tokens, mascot placement, imagery and voice rules
  composition  where creation legitimately lives: layout, state narrative, content and
               sequencing — provided every region still maps to a real component or to an
               app-owned pattern the record declares

  A generated direction that satisfies all three is verifiable: its anatomy can be diffed
  against the reference render, its palette against the brand record, and only its composition
  is judgement.
rules:
  - id: ANATOMY-1
    title: Component look comes from a real render
    governs: Governs every region a direction maps to a named component.
    cases:
      - id: case-1
        when: A direction names a grammar component for a region
        observe: |-
          The region's shape matches the component's real render — a reference capture of the
          installed package (storybook story or render harness), versioned beside the direction
          assets. A prompt that cites the component's name without a matching reference render
          cannot prove its region drew that component
      - id: case-2
        when: The direction and the real render disagree on containment
        observe: |-
          The real render wins. A `SurfaceListCard` drawn as rows on bare canvas while the real
          anatomy bounds them in a raised surface falsifies the direction, however attractive
          the flat version looks
      - id: case-3
        when: No real render of the component exists yet
        observe: |-
          The direction's anatomy claim is `unproven` until one is captured. Rendering the
          storybook story is cheaper than arguing from the export's props
  - id: ANATOMY-2
    title: Nested controls use the nested variant
    governs: Governs controls placed inside a surface that already owns a background.
    cases:
      - id: case-1
        when: An input sits inside a surface (card, panel, band)
        observe: |-
          The field uses the component's nested (`secondary`) variant, so its boundary is
          visible against the surface. A field painted the same colour as the surface it sits
          on falsifies — the control is there but invisible as a control
      - id: case-2
        when: The surface is nested inside another surface
        observe: |-
          Depth tokens (`data-grammar-surface-depth`) decide which one is raised; both never
          carry the top treatment at once
  - id: ANATOMY-3
    title: Composition is the only place direction invents
    governs: Governs where a direction may introduce something the component inventory does not name.
    cases:
      - id: case-1
        when: The screen needs a region no component supplies (an illustration panel, a split
          layout, a hero band)
        observe: |-
          The record declares it as an app-owned region with its own anatomy description, and
          the direction is free inside that boundary. Declaring it honestly is required —
          passing an invented region off as a component falsifies
      - id: case-2
        when: The invented region carries brand elements (mascot, colour, imagery)
        observe: |-
          `brand/index.yaml`'s placement rules still govern it. A mascot inside a form control
          or a danger region falsifies
      - id: case-3
        when: An interactive element appears only for looks
        observe: |-
          Every control the direction shows is either wired or honestly marked as a route that
          does not exist yet. A forgot-password link the direction drew but never recorded
          falsifies
  - id: ANATOMY-4
    title: The formula is recorded per screen
    governs: Governs the provenance a direction asset must carry.
    cases:
      - id: case-1
        when: A direction asset is committed
        observe: |-
          Its prompt cites the reference render(s) used for anatomy and the brand revision used
          for surface, so a reviewer can replay which render and which brand produced it.
          A prompt whose only anatomy source is prose falsifies
      - id: case-2
        when: The grammar package revs
        observe: |-
          Reference renders are re-captured, and directions whose anatomy depended on the old
          render are flagged stale — never silently treated as still current
